---
title: "Testing"
layout: single
tags: [CMake, Tutorial]
toc: true
excerpt: How to add test-cases to your build tree
---
 
In this post, we'll take a brief look into how tests can be added to the CMake build tree and how they can be executed as part of the build with the `ctest` utility.

# Enabling testing
Before we can add any test executable / test case, we have to enable testing which is usually best done inside the top-level `CMakeLists.txt`:

{% highlight cmake linenos %}
... # project definition, etc.
enable_testing()
... # adding subdirectories, installing, packaging etc.
{% endhighlight %}

# Creating the test executable target
Suppose that we are writing a library `foo` and we decide to write tests for it. Inside `foo`'s CMakeLists.txt file, we can add another subdirectory `test`:
{% highlight cmake linenos %}
add_library(foo SHARED
    include/foo.h
    src/foo.cpp
)
add_library(MyProject::foo ALIAS foo)

... # modify target properties, installing, etc.

add_subdirectory(test)
{% endhighlight %}

Inside `.../foo/test/CMakeLists.txt` we're defining the test executable:

{% highlight cmake linenos %}
add_executable(fooTest
    fooTest.cpp
)

target_link_libraries(fooTest
    PRIVATE
        MyProject::foo
)

add_test(
    NAME MyTest
    COMMAND fooTest
)

add_custom_command(TARGET fooTest 
    POST_BUILD
    COMMAND ctest -C $<CONFIG>
)
{% endhighlight %}

First, we add the executable (`fooTest`) as we would add any other executable target via `add_executable()`.
Then, we'll link `fooTest` with `MyProject::foo`, the library that we want to test. 
Note that the alias target is used for linking.

We're then adding our test case by calling `add_test`. 
If a CMake target (`fooTest` in our case) is specified as the `COMMAND`, it will take the path to that executable when it is build for running the test case.

Here is the (dummy) C++-code of our test executable. ctest (the program that will execute the test case) evaluates the return value of the test executable to evaluate whether a test failed or succeeded.

{% highlight cpp linenos %}
int TestCase0()
{
    return 0;
}

int main(int, char**)
{
    return TestCase0();
}
{% endhighlight %}

Last, we'll tell CMake to run a custom command after `fooTest` has been built via the `POST_BUILD` parameter of `add_custom_command()`. 
The command that will then run the tests is called `ctest -C $<CONFIGURATION>`. 

After building `fooTest`, ctest will be executed and will produce the following output:
{% highlight bash linenos %}
Test project D:/home/programming/cmake_essentials/build
    Start 1: MyTest
1/1 Test #1: MyTest ...........................   Passed    0.01 sec

100% tests passed, 0 tests failed out of 1

Total Test time (real) =   0.02 sec
{% endhighlight %}

# Further information
You can tell ctest to filter certain tests, measure coverage, integrate memory checkers (valgrind's memcheck for example), use it in combination with powerful testing frameworks (like googletest) and much more. Check out the [documentation for ctest](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/ctest.1.html#ctest-1) for more details about ctest. This post should only serve as an initial starting point for getting the first tests running.

# Code & Resources
The code for this post can be found on Github via the following tag:
[Testing](https://github.com/markusrothe/cmake_essentials/tree/Testing)

Also, checkout Daniel Pfeifer's [brilliant talk about modern CMake](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bsXLMQ6WgIk)